# DeteksiDiniPenyakitDiabetesMellitus
ABSTRACT


Diabetes Mellitus is the body still produces insulin but does not produce enough amounts or the body has difficulty using insulin efficiently, it is called insulin resistance. Factors that cause Diabetes Mellitus can be grouped into three groups, namely sociodemography consisting of age, sex, and occupation. Behavioral and lifestyle factors such as vegetable and fruit consumption, smoking habits, alcohol consumption and physical activity. Clinical or mental states such as time indexes of the body (obesity), waist circumference (central obesity) and stress. Based on these factors often the public does not realize that he entered the category of Pre Diabetes Mellitus or is certainly exposed to Diabetes Mellitus. Most people are aware of themselves being exposed to Diabetes Mellitus when people experience other complications. This becomes a serious problem to prevent people from being exposed to Diabetes Mellitus
and may soon be aware of whether it is exposed to Diabetes Mellitus or not. With the problem of the issue, in this final task will be designed a system that can know of Dicky detection of dillius diabetes. This system is designed by using a computer - core forward system's method system that can via some data or some of the facts that are moving forward towards conclusions (goal). This drumpling deteer question is in the application of the application that was resources at the expert or doctors about factors and symptoms of diabetus and conclusions whether user diagility was exposed to mellius's diabetes or was not gained on the results of the accurate and valid


BACKGROUND


Diabetes Mellitus (DM) and its complications have become a serious public health problem and are an important cause of morbidity, mortality and disability rates throughout the world. Globally the DM day of the world is celebrated every November 14th, this proves that DM is a global problem that occurs in every country, both in developed countries and in poor and developing countries.
In this final project that needs to be detected early is Diabetes Mellitus Type 1 and Type 2 because Diabetes Mellitus Type 2 (DMT2) is caused by age, environmental conditions, unhealthy lifestyles such as consuming foods or drinks that are high in sugar, smoking and rarely exercising and Diabetes Mellitus Type 1 (DMT1) is caused by genetic factors (hereditary disease inherited from previous offspring) and autoimmune (destruction of pancreatic beta cells that have little or no insulin secretion can be determined by the level of cpeptide protein whose numbers are few or not detected at all). In addition, DMT1 and DMT2 need to do early detection because DM is a disease that tends to be less aware, usually someone only realizes it if they already experience complications of DM.
To implement this system design, an expert system method is needed, namely Forward Chaining. Expert system is useful for analyzing in solving a problem in order to get a solution or answer that is valid and accurate in analyzing a problem, in this case is to analyze whether someone has DM, pre-DM or not DM. Expert system analysis based on the Forward Chaining method that represents expert knowledge (knowledge base) in accordance with the facts of the conditions experienced by the user (initial state) who move forward to take the decision tree Depth First Search to get conclusions (goals).
Therefore the title of this thesis is "Designing of Early Diabetes Mellitus Detection Application Using Forward Chaining Classification Method on Android-Based Expert System" in order to have a positive and beneficial impact on the community because it does not have to cost a fortune and spend a lot of time for consultation and checking to hospital.


GOALS


1. Make an android-based application to detect DM early on the basis of DM early detection questions sourced from experts (doctors) so that the data and conclusions are accurate and valid.
2. The benefits to be achieved from the research are the development of Android-based applications that can detect DM disease early based on expert data so that people do not need to spend a lot of money, time and energy to check at the hospital.
3. Implementation of this application uses the expert system method that is Forward Chaining aims to represent expert knowledge and use the decision tree Depth First Search to obtain the conclusion whether the user is affected by DM, Pre-DM or not DM based on the answer to the user's early detection question.


DESIGN AND BUILD


This system is designed on an Android-based smartphone, which aims to detect early DM disease. In the system, the input starts with the stage where the user answers 51 questions for the detection of DM in the application. The question is based on the doctor (expert) and medical reference about DM disease so that the data obtained is valid and accurate data. The answer process can be done through the early detection feature on the smartphone. After the user answers the question, the system will process the input using the Forward Chaining expert system method in order to obtain output in the form of a Goal (the conclusion) whether the user is suffering from DM, Pre-DM or not DM.
Experts are needed to get data and conclusions that are valid and accurate. The expert in this study was a doctor named Dr. Woro Hapsari Wahyuningrum, Sp.PK NIP 19820519 200902 2 004 who holds the position of Head Laboratory Installation at the Occupational Health Hospital of West Java Province. Data sourced from experts are expert knowledge about Diabetes Mellitus and the expert system method of Forward Chaining, Depth First Search, literature studies in the form of medical references about Diabetes Mellitus and expert system references regarding Forward Chaining methods, Depth First Seacrh, symptoms of DMT1 , symptoms - signs of DMT2, knowledge base, grouping of DM, results of disease conclusions, weight of answers, 51 questions of early detection of DM disease, DM decision tree, Pre-DM, and not DM use Depth First Search to get the conclusion of diagnosis from experts applied in the Forward Chaining expert system method whether someone has DM, Pre-DM or not DM.
1. Input (input) is input from users who have answered 51 questions of early detection of Diabetes Mellitus sourced from Experts (Doctors). The input is in the form of Symptoms - Signs of Diabetes Mellitus.
2. Inference Engine (inference engine) is the brain of the expert system, this section contains the mechanism of thinking functions and patterns of system reasoning used by an expert. This mechanism will analyze a particular problem and then look for the best answer or conclusion. From the facts obtained during the question-answer process with the user, as well as the rules stored in the knowledge base, the inference engine can draw an accurate and valid conclusion. The Inference Engine uses the Forward Chaining expert system method that starts from the intial state (the initial facts obtained from the input "yes" user answers) then represents knowledge base that moves forward to find goals (user diagnosis results). Knowledge base is the knowledge base of Doctors (Experts) about Diabetes Mellitus which contains IF-THEN rules in order to explain the purpose and rules (rules) based on the knowledge of Doctors (Experts). The rules applied were 51 pieces. The conclusion table contains some conclusions of the disease whether a person has DM, Pre-DM or not DM.
3. Decision Tree is used to draw conclusions from the problem at hand. In this decision making using the decision tree DepthFirst Search method. Depth First Search is a method of searching a tree by tracing a branch of a tree to find a solution. The search is performed on one node in each level from the far left and continued on the right node. If a solution is found then there is no need for a backtracking process, i.e. search back to get the desired path. In addition, if the solution sought is at the far left and or at a deep level, DFS will find it quickly.
4. Ooutput System. This result, called Goal, is obtained after all processes are completed in order to obtain accurate and valid conclusions whether the user is exposed to DM, Pre-DM or not DM.


For more describe, please look my Final Project Book in my GitHub
